---
title: "Helpful Notion features for running D&D Campaigns"
published: 2023-04-11
updated: 2023-04-11
meta:
  title: ""
  description: ""
---

import { LinkButton } from "~/components/link-button";

# {attributes.title}

Notion is one of my favorite tools for running D&D campaigns. I use it for
[a lot of things](/using-notion-dm-screen). It's great not just for note taking
and world building like other docs tools but also as a really simple code-free
database tool.

There's a lot of features in Notion, so much so that there's quite a steep
learning curve to get past just using it for a simple notes and document editor.
Here's a few features in Notion I use in running D&D or other TTRPG campaigns:

## Databases for Session notes

The most immediately obvious way I'm sure most people think to use Notion for
D&D is for note-taking for sessions. It's a great start but one way to upgrade
that experience is by making a notes
[database](https://www.notion.so/help/intro-to-databases), rather than just
creating sub-pages under a "session" page. This allows you to add properties to
each note; from a simple "Date" of session to the pages which makes it easy to
filter or sort to complex ones such as relationships to encounters you run
during that session. It's a good way to get started with learning Notion
databases, as much of the things you'd track in Notion should probably be part
of a database.

## Gallery view for NPCs

Once you get your feet wet learning the ins-and-outs of databases, you'll learn
there are many different views for those databases including timelines,
calendars, and simple lists. I use
[Gallery View](https://www.notion.so/help/galleries) for things like NPCs by
uploading an portrait to each NPC page and setting that portrait as the gallery
image. It makes scrolling through a list of NPCs much more visual and easy to
reference.

## Links to reference key items

Using the `@-command` you can
[link](https://www.notion.so/help/create-links-and-backlinks) to another page,
which is a great way to create a web of information for planning or running your
campaign. This is incredibly useful for tying together your key campaign
elements from NPCs to Locations to Quests. Clicking on a link will open up that
page in a so you can quickly peek to view an the details of that page then close
it returning to your original page. You can view backlinks so if you want to see
where an NPC is referenced throughout your notes or in your quests, you can
easily find that information right on the NPC's page.

## Callouts for important information

Callouts are a [block](https://www.notion.so/help/what-is-a-block) in Notion
where you can specify small blurbs of text, an icon, and it's formatted to be
emphasized within the page. Callouts are great for important information within
a page and I use them when planning dungeons and encounters to callout traps,
hidden enemies, secret doors, difficult terrain and more. It makes it really
easy to notice when scanning through my notes on a dungeon that a particular
area has some surprises or attributes the characters need to know â€” or not know.

## Toggles for rooms

On the opposite end of the spectrum to callouts is the toggle block, which
allows you to _hide_ information behind a single line description. I use toggles
for dungeons with lots of rooms, with each room's details hidden within the
closed toggle. This keeps the page focused while you play and easy to reference
exactly what each room contains while hiding the details of the other rooms.

## Buttons for automating repetitive tasks

A new feature in Notion that has nearly endless possibilities in Notion is
[buttons](https://www.notion.so/help/template-buttons) which allow you to repeat
and automate simple actions. You can create blocks, create pages, edit DB
properties, open pages, and more. The main place I use buttons now is in Session
and Encounter creation, where previously I had a lot of steps needed to set up
an session or set up an encounter, now they just require a simple button press.

---

If you haven't already I hope you give Notion a shot in your campaign planning,
prep, or sessions. I have found it incredibly handy!

I leverage these tools and many more in my 5e Campaign Wiki Notion template, so
if you like these ideas but don't want to go through the hassle of setting it
all up yourself or want a base to work from, check out my template! Just visit
the template below and duplicate!

<p className="not-prose">
  <LinkButton href="https://kennygoff.notion.site/5e-Campaign-Wiki-2234b289a06d47c6967a99a934864c6a">
    Get 5e Campaign Wiki &rarr;
  </LinkButton>
</p>
