---
title: A new freelancer's guide to freelancing
published: 2017-03-27
updated: 2019-03-15
oneliner: Advice about getting into freelancing, from a new freelancer
original: https://medium.com/@kennygoff/a-new-freelancers-guide-to-freelancing-f255c7d22137
meta:
  - title: "A new freelancer's guide to freelancing"
  - name: description
    content: >
      Advice about getting into freelancing, from a new freelancer. Including
      best ways to get started, set your prices, and sharing your work
---

export const meta = frontmatter.meta;
export const headers = frontmatter.headers;

import { PostCallout } from "../components/post-callout";
import { PostDate } from "../components/post-date";
import { formatDate } from "../utils/format-date";

# {frontmatter.title}

<PostDate date={frontmatter.published} />

<PostCallout
  title={`Update ${formatDate(frontmatter.updated)}`}
  content="I'm no longer freelancing! I really enjoyed the experience but after a solid 2 years I've decided to look for fulltime employment once again. I still wholehartedly agree with this post so I will keep it up for anyone who is thinking of going freelancing and wants some advice to get started!"
/>

I've been freelancing full time for just over a month now, and it's been an
interesting journey and a somewhat rocky transition from being an employee to
running my own business. I've been asked a few times by people what it's like to
get started so I thought I'd take the time to write down my thoughts to
potentially help anyone looking to start out. I'm a web and app developer, but
I'll try to keep my advice generic enough to apply if you're an artist or writer
or in any other line of work.

## Before the jump

### Test the waters

It's very possible to hold down small part time moonlighting contracts you can
do on the side. Freelancing isn't an easy thing to do and its not for everyone,
so trying it out before you dive in head first is a good idea. I didn't do this
and wish I had. At least get some practice by contacting potential clients and
start scheduling work.

![Person skydiving](/images/posts/new-freelancer-1.jpg)

### Pack a parachute

This advice is a bit obvious, but don't leave your “day job” without any sort of
plan or financial security, preferably 6–12 months of expenses. This is the same
advice for freelancing, a startup, or just if you want to quit your job and
start a beet farm. Have a plan and a way to pay the bills. Sometimes financial
security isn't possible if you just lost your job or are trying to escape a
hostile one. Do what you must, but you should still have a plan and be prepared
to hustle hard to get work right away.

For me, this was as simple as lining up a gig that I could do part-time or
full-time, then make the jump at the right moment, when I was financially safe
enough. I had enough savings to pay rent and bills for a few months, and a gig
lined up to keep me going without a worry.

### Know what you're getting into

This is sort of a followup to my first point, but you should know that
freelancing isn't just “flexible work without a boss.” Freelancing means finding
clients, negotiating, marketing yourself, doing taxes, paying for your own
benefits, giving yourself time for vacation and sick days, and a huge list of
other things. You are running a business, and that means you need to learn how
to run a business. I'm not going to try to run down every item, so check out a
list of resources that helped me at the bottom of this post.

This isn't meant to scare you, but to ensure you're prepared for the reality of
freelancing. I highly recommend at least trying to talk to potential clients
before you freelance full time. Negotiations, marketing, and other skills can be
learned, but you at least need to get somewhat comfortable with client
communication before starting.

## Sticking the landing

### Become shameless

Don't feel ashamed to ask for help or to ask friends, family, or colleagues for
references! Own your new life and broadcast it! Learn to hone your own pitch on
friends. Ask them if they know anyone hiring contractors. Ask them to ask their
friends. Don't pester people of course, but don't feel like you have to do it
all on your own. My first gig was with a startup that a friend was working at.
My second was with a friend of a friend who needed a new website built.

![Group of people skydiving, holding hands](/images/posts/new-freelancer-2.jpg)

Work on your niche when you tell friends. Use it as an opportunity to safely
hone your pitch and your specialty. “Web developer” is very broad, whereas
“Wordpress eCommerce specialist” can click in people's minds. As you find your
niche, update your friends on what you do. They might not know someone who
“needs a website” but it might register that they know someone who has been
complaining about their online storefront always breaking! I'm still working on
this myself, narrowing in on my niche, and finding how to pitch more narrowly
than just “web developer.”

### Under-promise, over-deliver

I try to go above and beyond what's expected of me. This is not necessarily how
everyone works and I don't treat every project like this. But in general, I try
to make realistic estimations and stick to them, yet over-deliver whenever
possible. It builds trust and really can help solidify relationships, which is
important especially in markets where clients don't always trust contractors.

This could be as simple as adding a “nice to have” feature that was originally
out of scope at no extra cost or providing a few extra options for a poster
design. Do not blatantly lie about scope just to deliver extra “goodies”. The
way I normally treat this is if I have some spare time on my hands I work an
extra hour or two for free, as long as I'm on target with the main scope of
work.

### Work with a contract

Please don't go into a working relationship without a contract. I am not a
lawyer and this is not law advice, so please consult a lawyer and get a
customized contract for your work. It can be costly, but a simple Master Service
Agreement and Scope of Work that you can reuse with each client and fit your
needs exactly are a worthy investment. You should never do work without knowing
the scope of the project, deliverables, and cost. Contracts are good for both
parties even just as a way to discuss these points on paper in a solidified way.

### Double your rate

Whatever you think your rate should be, you should probably just double it now.
I don't want to get into charging hourly vs charging weekly vs fixed bids, so to
keep it simple, let's look at hourly. Take the salary you want to make and
divide by 1,000 for an hourly rate. If you made $80,000/year, charge $80/hour.
If you made $120,000/year, charge $120/hour. This is a very rough estimate just
to get an idea. From there adjust as needed. If you're worried about your rate,
just pick something and go with it, but be ready to raise your rates as you go.
Most people will undervalue themselves with respect to their rate, which is why
the “divide by 1000” calculation is a helpful albeit oversimplified way to avoid
race-to-the-bottom rates.

As an independent contractor, you have to pay your own taxes, benefits, and
business expenses. Taxes and benefits are not taken out of your paycheck so you
need to make sure that the amount you're charging covers not only your own
bills, but also taxes, benefits, and any profit you want to make.

### Not all of your time is billable

I could write a whole post on this one topic so I'll try to keep it brief. Let's
say you're a salaried employee working 40 hours a week (I hope you're not
working more). Do you get paid for lunch breaks? How about bathroom time? What
happens if you get up to get some water? What happens if you're feeling
unproductive? In most cases, a salaried employee will get paid the overall time
they spend “at the office”, not for the output of quality work. If you work
9-to-5 but take 15 minutes of bathroom breaks your employer doesn't dock your
pay 15 minutes.

Remember how I said freelancing is running a business? Treat your time running
the business as part of your job. If you plan to work 40 hour weeks, but then
book 40 hours a week with a client, when do you think you'll do bookkeeping?
Call other clients? Work on your website? Do marketing? All of a sudden you're
working 60 hours a week, burned out, and wanting to run back to being an
employee.

A lot of people view this in different ways, but in my opinion, you shouldn't be
billing more than 20–30 hours a week. Why? Because then you can bill only your
highest quality hours. Billing weekly? That still fits, I actually prefer
billing weekly myself. Just assume a week is 20–30 hours and pick what feels
right to you. By only charging for the real quality work you do, you're also
able to better justify upping your rate. I make this delineation easy and clear
cut for my own records, as I use Pomodoro technique and just consider the time
in pomodoros as my quality time worked.

### Know when to say no

Get comfortable with saying no to projects. This might be tough at first, but
learn to say no to clients that raise a lot of red flags, aren't willing to pay
your rate, or projects that won't advance your career or business. It's a very
useful muscle to flex.

![Person in parachute landing](/images/posts/new-freelancer-3.jpg)

## Just the beginning

These are some of the main things I think about as a new freelancer, and I
definitely don't take my own advice as much as I should. But if you're thinking
about getting started, I hope this perspective from a fresh new freelancer will
help give you a better idea of what its like.

Have any thoughts on these points? Disagree with anything? Leave a response! I
would love the feedback and discussion.

### Resources that helped me

- [https://www.freelancersunion.org/](https://www.freelancersunion.org/)
- [https://devchat.tv/freelancers](https://devchat.tv/freelancers): Freelancing
  podcast that has an episode on almost every topic you can imagine and then
  some
- [https://doubleyourfreelancing.com/topics](https://doubleyourfreelancing.com/topics)

## Credits

All photos by [Kamil Pietrzak](https://unsplash.com/@kpietrzakweb) on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com).
